you want to live until 100 what's the
most important thing is it nutrition is
it being physically active is it
sunshine is it sleep is it modifying our
stress and lowering our stress or is it
lowering our pollution and chemical
burden we can't say that any one of
those is any more important than the
other
and the literature
the medical literature just explodes
with information about how damaging
pollution is i see a lot of people with
atrial fibrillation i tell them it's a
pollution story your body we know
inflammation is going on inflammation is
coming from pollution and back to the
organic thing the pesticides the
chemicals are part of that pollution if
you go into the grocery store and you're
walking around the grocery store think
if you were walking with a caveman think
if you were walking with tom billy who's
you know ancestors from 20 000 years ago
what would he or she
recognize
in that store they would recognize the
green leafy vegetables they would
recognize animal products they would
recognize eggs
but everything else in the center of the
store they wouldn't so our ancestors
never ate wheat they never ate gluten
why would we expect that we can eat that
now
everybody welcome to another episode of
health theory today's guest is dr jack
wolfson he's a best-selling author and
board-certified cardiologist he's also
the founder of the wolfson integrative
cardiology clinic a keynote speaker and
the creator of the doctors wolfson line
of supplements his radical and at times
controversial views have been featured
on cnn abc usa today and many many
others and where i want to start today
is all about lifestyle so
i have an obsession with i want to live
forever that's the the god's honest
truth um i know that right now i'm in a
collision course with death but what i
want to talk about is
what from a lifestyle perspective should
people be doing
they really want to optimize our health
well i think there's a lot of different
factors that go into it and that's what
anyone's goal is of course right we want
to live a long life and we want to live
a a healthy long life at that where
where mainstream medicine really fails
is that we keep people alive
seemingly forever
but they're sick or they're demented and
the quality of life is absolutely
terrible so
what we don't learn in medical school
they don't teach us about lifestyle they
don't tell us about nutrition they don't
tell us about anything except for
pharmaceuticals and therefore we really
know nothing about cause and that's what
i've become really is a doctor of cause
typically where i come from someone has
coronary artery disease will say it's
genetics it's a pharmaceutical
deficiency
it's a procedure deficiency it's
something like that but i've become a
doctor of cause and causation of trying
to figure out why someone has cause of
disease and lifestyle is a big part of
it all right so the book the
paleocardiologist
if if i were going to ask you to
describe that without being able to use
the word paleo how would you describe
that so it's not just about the the diet
or nutrition it's about like you said
it's about the lifestyle living the
lifestyle of our ancestors in the 21st
century and i think that's going to give
us our best health
outcomes so if we think about things
like sunshine and the importance of
sleep and just being physically active
outdoors and avoiding all the pollutants
and chemicals that's what it's really
about if you do want to achieve that
hundred-year lifestyle one thing that i
think about as somebody of
roughly northern european descent is
that [__] is cold so the idea of people
being
of of that descent spending a lot of
time
naked in the sun because i love sunshine
what you talk about with vitamin d and
cholesterol which i've never actually
heard somebody talk about before i
thought was really really interesting
you just moved to um
colorado and i was imagining you out in
the snow bucket ass naked like how do
people in colder climates get enough
sunshine live that one element anyway of
the lifestyle well for one we did
actually get outside naked in the sun
and it was 25 degrees and actually in
the sun it was it was very nice you did
like very family my entire family
outside naked and of course the baby too
we want the baby to get all the health
aspects is there a cold exposure element
to that that's useful
because that seems like if if i if i
were a hunter-gatherer and i'm not
thinking oh i'm trying to live forever
i'm just thinking it's cold
my gut instinct is historically people
in that kind of environment would be
pretty wrapped up no
no i mean they certainly would i
wouldn't recommend it for long periods
of time but the whole point is we want
to get that sun exposure while we can
because the sun
does an infinite number of things to
help heal us
it is fantastic for heart it's
anti-cancer it's great for your brain i
mean just so many different things
anti-autoimmune so the sun is an amazing
thing which unfortunately
the talking heads on television tell us
to avoid so we're listening these people
say avoid the sun get sunscreen why
would we want to avoid the sun it's been
around for billions of years it was here
before man was here in every story of
how we came onto this planet the sun was
always here first we should embrace the
sun but to your point it has to be smart
sun so we want to we don't want it to be
like we were on spring break and we were
in college and we went somewhere and got
our skin fried we don't want that we
want to do smart sun and that's what we
practice that's what we teach our
patients as well you know a few minutes
here and there and then slowly building
up so you're right if you're of northern
european descent although we all came
from the equator we all came from the
middle east we all came from northern
africa and then dispersed if we do have
lighter skin like you and i do we need
to be smart about it you know we could
talk science about it all day long about
what it does like you said for
cholesterol we're all concerned about
cholesterol what if high cholesterol is
a sunshine deficiency syndrome
yeah that's really that's super
interesting to me but um you're talking
about that that the interaction of the
sun and the cholesterol actually turns
the cholesterol into vitamin d can you
walk us through that you just said it
right there the you know the skin is you
know coursing through the skin is
something called 7d hydroxy cholesterol
so our body takes all these different
paths to make that form of cholesterol
and then if the sun hits it it turns it
into vitamin d if you don't get sun
then it turns into excess cholesterol
high cholesterol low d get sun
high d low cholesterol and
doesn't that sound better than taking a
pharmaceutical
uh then taking some artificial you know
way to lower your numbers down what if
sunshine which is free and people ask me
they're like you know what do i do i
live in minnesota i don't get much
sunshine and i say move you know move to
southern mexico move to arizona move to
somewhere otherwise if you're living in
colorado or whatever just get as much
sun as you can sun's out
guns out what about um cyclical living
so one of the things that i find
interesting and i have no idea if this
is real but you want to talk about
something that hits me just sort of
intuitively correct it would be that
that there are times to do it so if i
think about us all
meaning anything like sunshine but there
are times not to do it so
if i think about okay the migration
patterns of humans going up through
northern africa and then spreading out
that as we do that the skin lightens so
that we can generate more vitamin d with
less sun exposure but are there times of
the year where we would have developed
to not
get sun and is there something in that
and and literally this is not something
i have like some deep hypothesis um
but it's just an interesting question to
me are there times where we should be
avoiding it
well i don't think we should ever be
avoiding it in the sense that we went to
sleep with the sun down we awoke before
the sun rise we saw the sun rise and
then we were working in and out of the
sun all day long we were hunting and
gathering
clearly in the in the
different la you know in the extreme of
latitudes uh you're not going to get as
much sun in the cold in the winter and
therefore you really need to stock up in
the summer time and and really unfor in
21st century we have to really make a
concerted effort because we're not
having much of a reason to go outside
we're not farmers we're not hunters
we're not gatherers we don't need to do
that so we do need a more concerted
effort to do it so coming back to um
cyclical stuff so sun certainly cyclical
in certain parts of the world and then
food certainly cyclical do you when you
think about trying to match where our
ancestors were in terms of lifestyle do
you think about that like eating only
things that are in season
is that an issue
it's definitely an issue and i i
definitely i want to keep it as simple
as possible for most people to be able
to follow i do think clearly that if you
are from colder weather climates then
you probably were much more dependent on
animal foods than you were plants for
example eskimos eat only animal foods uh
and and you know people at the extremes
you know once again they were they were
mostly hunters as opposed to the
gatherers and then if you were closer to
the equator or you were in the south
pacific or you were an island or in
hawaii then your foods would have been
different but you know back to again
about this vitamin d thing in the winter
time you get vitamin d from eating
animal foods as well
so that would be your source of vitamin
d but again the sun is so much more than
just vitamin d
but i do want to keep it easier on
people because we do get that argument
very often well yeah you know the the
hunter-gatherer in hawaii was different
than the eskimo and that's probably true
so do you advise on that like setting
the the really simple advice aside for a
second do you look at people's genetics
do you look at their ancestral
path like does any of that play into
when you advise people on a regimen
well i think we can look at some
genetics but when i was going through
medical training in the mid 90s
everything was about genetics it was
going to be the human genome project is
coming out we're going to learn all
about our dna and all about our genetics
and it's going to revolutionize
everything well it turns out we learned
about the genetics and we learned it's
not about the genetics
we learned that it's about the
epigenetics right it's about how the
environment shapes our dna and causes
our dna to manufacture certain proteins
or not manufacture certain proteins
so it's not too much of a genetic thing
you know that i that i really put into
it all right so now let's go to the
simple approach so
what are the things that i'm going to
want to do for optimal living so we've
got sun exposure
there's going to be some element i'm
sure of exercise
what are some really prescriptive things
that you have on nutrition and i've
heard you talk a lot about organic
obviously paleo
give us that in terms of what should be
in my fridge in my pantry well there's a
lot of debate going on as you know right
now and i know you've interviewed a lot
of different people with a lot of
different nutrition opinions but
you know paleo
and
hunter-gatherer ancestral diets that is
the that is the original diet like
everything else is just a fad every
other diet no matter what it is you can
say south beach or atkins you know or
you know veganism those are all fads the
original diet is hunter gatherer and we
that should not be up for debate you
don't tell or ask a lion hey you know
what do you think you should eat today
you know the lion instinctually knows
what to eat and so should we as humans
but we've lost that over the last ten
thousand years so
my book is called the paleocardiologist
but it's not about paleo nutrition it is
about the paleo lifestyle and i say no
matter what nutrition you follow make it
organic because you can have organic
cookies and cupcakes and ice cream so
you can still have you know these foods
that you love but just make them organic
so you get the chemicals out of there i
think the usda does a fair job of
certifying what's organic and what's not
they make the the companies actually
jump through the hoops to make sure the
materials are what they are when it's
third party tested by environmental
working group and others uh they do
determine that pesticide levels may not
be zero in organic but certainly much
lower organic wines for example from
california still have pesticides
unfortunately but much lower amounts so
we can only do the best we can obviously
the air is polluted the water is
polluted the soil is not what it was
broccoli from asia is not the same as
broccoli from california so if we were
to talk about what's the most important
thing for health you want to live till
100 what's the most important thing is
it nutrition is it being physically
active is it sunshine is it sleep is it
modifying our stress and lowering our
stress or is it lowering our pollution
and chemical burden we can't say that
any one of those is any more important
than the other
and the literature
the medical literature just explodes
with information about how damaging
pollution is i see a lot of people with
atrial fibrillation i tell them it's a
pollution story your body we know
inflammation is going on inflammation is
coming from pollution and back to the
organic thing the pesticides the
chemicals are part of that pollution
so well let's break that one down so
atrial fibril fibrillation easy for you
to say right
what what exactly is it and why is it a
pollution issue okay so atrial
fibrillation is a total pain point for
people because we can talk about oh what
are some natural ways to deal with blood
pressure cholesterol whatever it may be
but atrial fibrillation is an irregular
hurt rhythm and the irregular heart
rhythm so instead of the heart going
boom boom boom it goes
and it races and people feel lousy when
they have it it's actually pretty common
in athletes what's called the athlete's
heart so i see professional cyclists
professional basketball players people
that even while they're playing young
people come down with this condition the
heart is inflamed leading to this
abnormal heart rhythm
so what is the cause of the inflammation
and that's what we need to find out once
again nutrition and lifestyle that's
what it is all right so let's get to
some really specific ones so you first
said that that was a toxin issue what
are some common toxins that would lead
to the inflammation of the heart oh
common toxins i you know once again just
air pollution we know from air pollution
increased risk of everything obviously
cancer lung cancer but cardiovascular
disease brain disease there's literature
that says noise pollution so if you live
near an airport or a busy road
it's a problem as well the noise
generates stress and stress leads to
inflammation just like stress alone
turns on inflammation genes yeah yeah
human survivors people that survived
over the over a million years where the
people that under stress they would be
quick to become inflamed because your
immune system would therefore be
stronger like i feel stress coming on
and therefore now i'm ready to
fight the animal or repair the wound
well now that doesn't happen to us and
that's why chronic stress is so bad and
chronic stress leads to that chronic
inflammation response and inflammation
is just your body's just saying i'm
under attack and we need to figure out
why okay so those are some of the the
toxins what are some dietary things that
are going to cause that kind of
inflammation specifically around the
heart just to keep it specific yeah well
gluten for example gluten
wheat
i'm proud to say that i coined the term
leaky heart syndrome so a lot of people
talk about leaky gut well the leaky gut
allows things to get into the body that
don't belong so now the barrier of the
heart opens up as well what we call
leaky heart so now the immune system and
all these different things that don't
belong in the heart tissue are there
immune system comes in immune cells die
plaque forms plaque ruptures
and
now someone's 55 year old father is dead
i mean that's how it goes yeah i heard
you talk about that that and um leaky
brain i don't know if that was also
something that you coined but um that's
super interesting to me i'd never heard
anybody talk about that now in the gut
i'm aware of the lining of the gut which
is a single cell thick if i'm not
mistaken is there something similar in
the heart exactly the same it's called
the endothelial lining so the gut is the
epithelial lining because it really is
continuation of the skin and then of
course the lining of the brain is the
blood brain barrier
so when you do have that leaky
blood-brain barrier from a lot of
different things
uh yeah you develop autoimmune disease
of the brain you develop dementia uh you
name it so is this all that's really
interesting so let's let's go deeper
really fast on the brain so you've got
people talking about um alzheimer's is
being um basically type three diabetes
which is interesting i never thought of
it as being an inflammation problem is
is that to you sort of one and the same
or those competing hypothesis
yeah you know um that whole type three
of the brain i think is a bogus uh term
i don't like it it's still type two so
type one
is where someone has autoimmune disease
of their pancreas they no longer make
insulin the type twos still make insulin
it just doesn't work and that's the same
process that leads to
brain issues cognitive issues and for
all those different reasons because
essentially the immune system is
attacking the brain tissue and all these
poisons and things that do not belong in
the brain
are getting through through that
compromised blood-brain barrier and so
just going back to i get what you're
saying about it's not type 3 it's type 2
but do you think that there's a causal
relationship between elevated glucose in
the bloodstream and the breakdown of the
blood-brain barrier that's allowing
things to get into the brain that are
meant to be there which is what triggers
the autoimmune response which creates
this sort of ever escalating
inflammation is is is that basically
what's happening in dementia and
possibly stroke or is there something
else so what happens is when when
glucose is high one of the things that
happens is that glucose
glycates or changes the proteins
of the body of the brain of the
blood-brain barrier so now those
proteins are dysfunctional
so when those proteins and enzymes no
longer work as well as they should
yeah you know leakage happens immune
cells are activated
uh you know getting getting rid of the
cellular garbage like nothing works well
when everything is just kind of gummed
up and glued and that all comes from
elevated glucose okay so
when i think about things that you're
warning against like
a lot of people having a gluten
intolerance and things like that
are there
vegetables for instance i think would
meet your sort of bill of health
how do we begin to discern between
carbohydrates things that we can eat
things that we want to avoid things that
trigger
the
elevation of blood glucose the things
that trigger the inflammation in the
brain and elsewhere
and things that are helpful well i think
that if you if you you know if you go
into the grocery store and you're
walking around the grocery store think
if you were walking with a caveman think
if you were walking with tom bill to use
you know ancestors from 20 000 years ago
what would he or she
recognize
in that store they would recognize the
green leafy vegetables they would
recognize animal products they would
recognize eggs but everything else in
the center of the store they wouldn't so
our ancestors never ate wheat they never
ate gluten why would we expect that we
can eat that now
but
you know i am familiar with a lot of
kind of contrary opinions regarding some
of the vegetables and are there lectins
in the vegetables and things like that
maybe you were alluding to some of the
lectin stuff uh personally if i if i
if i was in the wild and i saw cucumbers
and tomatoes i would eat them if i have
followed a really good diet so if i
followed a pretty strict paleo diet or
hunter-gatherer diet and i still had
some health issues then maybe i would
dig a little bit deeper into some of
these lectin can you know containing
items but i think the lectin containing
vegetables i don't think are really much
of a problem for 98 of people and then
maybe we'll come into the fruit thing so
clearly fruit was different back then
than it is now back then it was crab
apples and wild berries now it's a
little bit different when i really
take a step back and i look at all of
the things that we're doing to influence
our environment and things that we take
as sort of natural or the way that it's
always been whether it's you know
raising wheat which is what 10 000 years
old which is relatively recent in the
grand scheme of things we've been
selectively breeding
plants that would have i'm guessing a
higher glucose content which makes them
taste sweeter for a very long time
but when you say that fruit used to be
different like if you had to give me
constituent parts is it just that it's
higher in sugar like what is the
fundamental difference yeah no i well
first of all it there is obviously the
size factor so like i said a crab apple
you know from back in the day was you
know much smaller than your fist now
you're getting apples you know they're
like this and they've pretty much giant
sized everything uh you know but even
the nutritional content is is clearly
different whether it's from vitamins and
minerals but back to you said you know
to the sugar level so the fructose of of
the the current
fruits that are out there is just sky
high the amount of caloric density
that's in there compared to the vitamins
and minerals has totally shifted so now
it's really just super sweet and like
you said it's not like genetically
modified foods but it is hybridized and
has been selected out 100 years ago
which apple tree had the sweetest apples
and then they just kept planting those
seeds over and over and over again and
now we're in the situation we're in so
you know these people that are like
they're fruit addicts because of the
sugar and they think it's being healthy
and it's clearly not it was going to ask
i obviously have an intuitive guess as
to what you're going to say but do you
treat fruits and vegetables like most
people group those together like they're
the same thing do you think of them as
as very distinct
items or should we be eating five
servings of fruits and vegetables every
day yeah i think they're totally
different they're totally totally
different one is super high in sugar uh
the other obviously most
you know green leafy vegetables you know
broccoli kale chard dandelion greens
those are all totally different um you
know i think the healthiest people are
best to
keep their fruit intake
a little more on the restricted side i'm
not saying don't have it but maybe you
know kind of be seasonal about you know
about it too maybe at this time of year
maybe more on the citrus side in the
summertime more of the
plums and the stone fruits and what i
like to do is thomas when when the
season comes in per se and it's stone
fruit season i'll indulge for for a week
or two and then i'll kind of back off
and say okay it's time to get back to
to a lower sugar lower fructose you know
semblance of nutrition walk me through a
a super typical day for you and i i
never want to put people into like one
day because i'm sure that there are sort
of variations for you but i want to know
everything what time in fact we'll start
it the night before what time you went
to bed what time you woke up
do you work out what do you eat where
did you get what you eat like all of
that so people can really understand
what your lifestyle looks like wow i'm
getting like anxiety thinking about i've
got three i've got three i've got three
children one of which is a one-year-old
my life is total chaos i love that
though that's perfect because i think so
many people align with that no i and i
totally agree so the night before we go
to bed uh we go to bed typically at
around 8 8 30. this time of year so so
essentially when the sun goes down we're
pretty close to getting into bed that is
the best for us
study after study and and common sense
tells us go to sleep with the sun down
awake with the sunrise nobody does that
i mean before the sunrise and we watch
the summers nobody does that i mean the
average time people go to sleep is
midnight but that's why there's so much
sickness because everybody's staring at
their cell phone their ipad their ipod
and i'm not telling you i i would i
would ask people not to do that
and if they want answers why they're
sick that's why now it's up to them but
no one ever told them that like no one
ever i taught 83 year old woman from
from south korea and she's like no one
ever told me that it was bad to stare at
my electronics until three o'clock in
the morning she's 83 i said what are you
doing until three o'clock in the morning
and she said she's on her tech all right
so i wake up
i do have a couple cups of organic
coffee
so i grew up in the midwest my father
was a coffee drinker i became a coffee
drinker as much as i want to vilify
coffee when you do it organically
there's some pretty darn good benefits
of especially organic coffee very high
antioxidants
why do i want to vilify it
it's an addiction it's a crutch
um from a cardiology standpoint it can
raise blood pressure it can cause
palpitations but once again if you're
going to do it do it or you know
organically and i don't want to piss off
everybody here by throwing coffee under
the bus so i don't want to say that when
i speak from the stage i'm like no one
throw coffee at me but no one's going to
do that because they're so addicted to
coffee they're like i'm not going to
waste my coffee throwing it at that guy
anyways so i wake up
and
and then i just i start getting ready
for the day as far as the kids lunches
my two older ones do go to a uh school
and their lunches are paleo lunches so
they're different from everybody else
they do get lots of vegetables they do
typically get some fruit we do a lot of
sardines we do
wild salmon we'll do chicken and pork
and all kinds of
meats that are in there as well
sometimes just eggs if there's a
farmer's market we'll go to a farmer's
market we'll try and shop local whenever
possible try and get outside in the sun
when you think about exercise and when i
think about exercise
it should be outdoors it should be
outside in nature typically with your
shirt off or
you know just the idea of exercise is
not sitting inside on the treadmill
with your headphones on your wi-fi on
getting blasted with emf electromagnetic
fields
from the environment that you're in
there with all the different cleaning
agents and bleaches that you're smelling
all the entire time
with uh you know in the artificial
lights
watching
some horrible television show that just
gives you more stress get outdoors and
it's free
it's i mean any time of year no matter
what the weather is you can bundle up i
used to cycle with a group in chicago
and the motto was there's no such thing
as bad weather just bad clothes so
uh that's kind of the day you know spend
the time you know with the dog and of
course i'm working if i'm not if i'm not
seeing patients
uh in the office then i'm writing or you
know whatever podcasting and so
it's
do you
and i'll ask about your kids do your
kids eat typically three meals do they
graze like what are your teachings on
that one yeah no they they typically eat
three meals yeah they'll do a breakfast
they'll do a they'll do a lunch at
school they'll often get a snack so we
pack their snack as well and uh and then
dinner is dinner yeah so they get the
three meals i haven't brought them into
like intermittent fasting or anything
else like that
uh i think there's probably value to
that you know as they get older and more
of you know but essentially what happens
in our house is that if we are basically
done with dinner by 5 30 6 o'clock
they're not eating again for another 12
hours so that is somewhat of a fast per
se but i'm not into necessarily fasting
just for fasting's sake for children i
don't think it's really anything that we
need to get into
as an adult i think it is great for for
a cleanse for a detox if someone's
looking to lose weight if they've got
certain health issues
i think it's worth it i like the 36 hour
fast so you have a dinner on a saturday
night and then you have nothing all day
sunday sunday you know once again just
water
water in the morning noon time evening
and then you wake up monday morning and
have an avocado or a greens drink so
it's a 36 hour fast on a weekly basis i
like that
so
what symptoms would somebody have to be
presenting for you to say fasting would
be useful here well certainly if they're
overweight i think it's a very
beneficial if if they've got a lot of
food addictions i think one of the best
things about fasting is that it breaks
food addictions at least temporarily i
mean i do obviously i understand all of
the biochemical benefits of it but i
think there is a lot of mental to it as
well that when you are stuck in this rut
and all you are doing is eating quickie
carbs and you're eating sugar or you're
drinking alcohol whatever it may be
that if you go into even that 36 hour
fast
and you really stay determined to do
that once again when you wake up 36
hours later
you're not craving a piece of chocolate
i mean you've probably known this maybe
if you've done fasting yourself it's
like
typically you're not like wow i can use
a glass of wine or i'd like a beer or a
hot fudge sundae you typically want
something healthy and at least it's been
my experience personally
with my patients as well so once again
these these food addictions i think the
the fast is a great way to break them
yeah it's interesting so in doing um
keto which would be fun to talk about
but in doing keto and doing it for long
periods of time and taking my carbs down
in having a
an identity around not eating
carbohydrates
over
time and i will say over a fairly long
period of time i ended up not being very
interested in eating overly sweet things
you hear a lot of people talk about that
with keto for me it definitely was not
instantaneous it was just a
whole lot of years of living a low carb
lifestyle largely to
manage my weight because i put on fat
incredibly easily
but after doing that for a long time
yeah i just sort of didn't think about
it and my wife had profound microbiome
issues and in trying to unwind some of
that we just weren't eating junk food we
weren't eating a lot of
anything other than just whole food
meats greens etc um and so just you do
that long enough and you start to break
your addiction to that mentally but i
will say that like from a
um
an ancestral path the one thing that i
think it's planted in us which we're
seeing play out in a horrifyingly
negative way right now is
you're
incentivized as a hunter-gatherer to
[__] gorge and when you have food you
want to eat as much of that food as you
can when you come across sugar which
back then would have been pretty rare
you want to stuff your little face full
of it when you think about being an
ancestor part of what worked for them
was they couldn't get a hold of it
because i think if you took an ancestor
on that shopping trip with me and you
took them into the center of the store
they'd be [__] stoked they'd go crazy
i mean we're literally seeing that play
out now which is interesting how do you
think about that when you're dealing
with a patient you know what they need
to do but they're struggling to actually
comply
well yeah i'm uh you know listen
obviously i understand all that uh i do
tell them when you're talking about
paleo foods
there is no set limit so
you can eat as much salmon as you want
and if you were if you came across a raw
salmon you would only eat so much of it
your body would say enough now when you
cook it and you start adding you know
barbecue sauce or dipping it in ketchup
as you know uh yeah then there's no more
set point you will go until you until
you bust
you know so that's that's totally true
but with patience i mean listen it can
be difficult i do think that
um if if somebody can get a coach
if somebody can get a health coach to
keep them on that plan
someone who's like a chief
accountability officer like much like
you and your wife may do it or how my
wife and i do it
if one of us is kind of going a little
bit too crazy and it's typically me then
the other one's going to kind of like
you know rein you in a little bit and
kind of get you back into reality
because as you said it's it's a horrible
addiction there's no doubt about it yeah
for sure i want to go back to something
you said earlier about the athlete's
heart why do athletes get the
um the heart issue that you were
describing before where the the beat is
like out of rhythm well there's there's
several different factors but i think
certainly it's linked to inflammation
so when the body is inflamed we need to
figure out why when the when we exercise
we generate a lot of free radicals as
we're our mitochondria are spitting out
oxygen but they're also spitting out a
lot of kind of damaged products well in
order to combat those damaged products
we need the antioxidants
we need those healthy foods but the
typical
cyclist or endurance athlete
they
have a you know sugary gatorade for
example or they have you know i i
remember when i used to do uh you know
distance races there was one there was
one time where the 20 mile mark they had
a krispy kreme donut stand
so and and you know if you're constantly
feeding yourself kind of foods that are
not satisfying and you know the need for
the you know the oxidative stress
happens you need the antioxidants and if
you're not getting those your body is
inflamed and afib is one of the issues
but those people can get hypertension
you look at people like oh they look so
healthy how'd they possibly have a heart
attack like bob harper from america's
biggest loser how'd that guy have a
heart attack well i can tell you a
million different ways from what i guess
i don't know personally you know but the
guy's inside of a film studio you know
all day lives in new york under constant
stress i don't know what his diet you
know was totally like i think it was
probably pretty good how much sunshine
do you get when you live in new york you
think that guy was going to sleep at 7
30 8 o'clock at night probably not so
with all due respect to him i don't mean
to call him out but he's been such a
a
uh face now for cardiovascular disease
and he's been a spokesman for big pharma
now
um
when people need to understand that this
guy had a you know cardiac event for a
reason had a heart attack for a reason
and that's what we need to figure out
yeah that's wow
it is pretty crazy to think that people
that are in that kind of shape are
actually creating problems for their
heart what do you think about distance
like ultra endurance marathons guys that
are doing ultra marathons like what is
that doing to the heart
well you know our ancestors once again
they didn't run marathons so i think
when a lot of people do that they are
are prone to have issues so
i'm more of the sprint activity burst
activity the high interval you know
training our ancestors their activity
was running after food or trying to
avoid being someone else's food or
hand-to-hand combat
building shelter getting water from over
there and bringing it here that's just
what we did but the science is pretty
darn clear that that short burst
activity raising up the heart rate up
and down you know that up the mountain
down the mountain activity is better
than just plodding along on the
treadmill in in the poison for 45
minutes if you had to pick something
that's popular whether it's a sport or a
style of um exercise what would you say
if you were only going to let people do
one thing is it wrestling is it football
is it tread or not treadmill we know
it's not treadmill yeah out running on
the street like what is that one thing
that comes as close to perfect as we're
gonna get i i do like soccer as an
activity especially for young kids i
think soccer is absolutely fantastic
uh i do like open water swimming if you
can do open water swimming why open
water so physically uh
because if you're in a pool you're in a
chlorine soup and you're breathing in
the chlorine and the chlorines in the
skin and chlorine just destroys
everything uh including kids so um as
much as i grew up in a chlorine pool i
started to throw throw water on that
parade but so i mean if you can get a
different quality pool uh uh there's
different you know ozone pools and
copper ion pools there's all different
things you can do now but uh you know
out here in california if you can jump
in the ocean you open water swimming i
think that's the best i also like tennis
i think tennis is a great game uh
perfect example of kind of burst
activity chasing the you know ball back
and forth a little bit then you get to
rest so i do like that
that's interesting um what do you think
about so with soccer i love soccer
really enjoyed playing it as a kid but i
super worried about the head trauma of
heading balls
my my 11 year old
uh he in his league they did not allow
the use of the head on the ball and i
think and that's what i'm thinking about
i think as when they become 12 or 13 and
certainly once they get into high school
years then they start allowing them to
do it i don't think using your head is
the
biggest deal in the world obviously when
you talk about brain trauma and
concussion but i think we need to be
aware of it i think i try and tell my
you know my son if you need to do it do
it don't shy away from it but don't
aggressively look to use your head
as an object in in sports and i think
the other thing is it's one thing to
head the ball but if two kids are going
ahead the ball at the same time and they
collide that's pretty catastrophic are
there any sports you wouldn't let your
kids play uh wouldn't let them play
football yeah that's for sure wouldn't
let them play football after that i
think we're yeah we're pretty good i do
love the outdoor activities i love just
going for a bike ride going for a walk i
love hiking
stand up paddle boarding kayaking
just once again just getting outside as
much as possible i think they do need to
be supervised as opposed to how we grew
up and just
you know go uh you know go ride your
bike and uh you know come back uh you
know six seven hours later no one's
gonna do that now
but uh get them outside
yeah no one's gonna do that now i don't
have kids for a reason one of the
reasons is i don't want to have to
answer the question of should you just
let them go but my parents would let me
ride my bike
i mean it had to have been four to five
miles away from the house this is at
like 11
which now seems insane but in terms of
like
earthing and getting outside and playing
in dirt like what's your take on that
yeah i mean listen we all feel better at
the beach we all feel better when we're
walking barefoot at the beach i love the
idea of getting outside walking barefoot
our ancestors were outside foot like
what's going on uh i mean there's so
many different facets of it whether it
is that grounding thing where you're
connected to the earth and electron
transfer you know from the earth up into
the body uh i think that's part of it
but i think also is that you know our we
the way the way that our bodies the way
that our spine works my wife is a doctor
of chiropractic so the way that we are
genetically designed is to be barefoot
and once you start altering with that
barefoot and putting shoes on now you
change
the functionality of the bones the
muscles the
tendons
and that leads to so many people with
back issues and neck issues and
ultimately cardiovascular issues because
as you have disease in the spine and the
autonomic nervous system that impacts
the heart because the heart is
innervated by the autonomics
parasympathetic sympathetics blood
pressure is all related to that atrial
fibrillation is related to that
cholesterol is related to autonomic
function so
would you say that if i walk barefoot
that would improve my cholesterol i'll
say yes really i think all those
different factors when you lead the
healthy lifestyle you get the great
results so i don't want to vilify
cholesterol cholesterol makes our you
know cholesterol as we said makes
vitamin d our brain is full of
cholesterol every single cell in our
body has cholesterol in the cell in the
cell membrane that encases every cell
our digestion comes from uh cholesterol
our sex hormones testosterone is from
cholesterol why would you want to lower
the precursor to testosterone if you're
a male or estrogen progesterone if
you're a female
you wouldn't you wouldn't you want to
find the perfect level for each one of
us
that's interesting so what do you think
about self-experimentation how do we do
it what blood levels should we be
checking
um
yeah how do people begin to get their
head around finding that perfect level
yeah i think that's an awesome question
because you know you you we can all talk
theory uh and and theory is great but
sometimes it's good to put it to
practice as far as okay what are my
objective numbers so you're following a
diet you're following a lifestyle you're
taking a bunch of these vitamins and
supplements great are they working and
we can test that now you know we didn't
have to test it 10 000 years ago because
it was perfect now it's not so we do
need to test and that's where you can
look at markers of inflammation
oxidative stress you can look at
advanced lipid numbers so you're looking
at particle numbers and particle sizes
you can look at blood sugar you can look
at
the immune system activity you can look
at intracellular nutrients like one of
my favorite nutrients to order
is
vitamin k
so there's companies that can test
what's called your micronutrients so
your vitamins and minerals
inside the cells this red blood cells
white blood cells just a simple blood
test
and these companies have the technology
to take a look and tell you what's in
there so are you getting enough things
into the cells that matter
so
our typical doctors now they check
serum levels for example or blood levels
of magnesium but that doesn't matter the
action for magnesium happens inside of
the cell so you have to know what's
going on inside of the cell as a
cardiologist and i'm dealing with some
with atrial fibrillation or hypertension
or whatever it may be a heart failure i
want to know what are the nutrients that
are getting into the cells and if
they're not i need to figure out why
and then also try and flood the system
with those particular nutrients to get
them inside the cells what are some
common reasons why somebody would be
having a hard time getting nutrients
into the cell so
common reasons obviously first of all
they're not taking it in the food
they're not digesting the food they're
not absorbing the food once it's in
their bloodstream it's not getting where
it needs to go
it's getting where it needs to go but
there is a receptor deficiency so the
catcher's mitt for the magnesium or for
the vitamin isn't working because either
it doesn't exist genetically or
autoimmune attack or there's a heavy
metal or some kind of plastic
environmental pollutant that's blocking
it
uh but now say it gets into the cell and
once again there could be other factors
inside the cell that are blocking it as
well so yeah that's kind of a long way
to say that that got complicated really
yeah yeah so there's but there's a lot
there's a lot that but we have to look
at all those different factors in order
to really make someone healthy let's
target one for now
a lot of what you were describing i
think based on other things you've said
we could sum up as inflammation yes okay
so
in fact
would you say sitting at sort of the
heart of
certainly the things that you deal with
as a cardiologist is it inflammation is
that sort of like the core thing that we
want to attack
well you know inflammation certainly is
the buzzword in every garden variety
cardiologist the 40 cardiologist that i
left they understand that inflammation
is a bad thing but their answer to
inflammation
is a statin drug
is aspirin is some other pharmaceutical
statins being billed as addressing
inflammation specifically sure yeah
interesting yeah no no no definitely so
historically it was about cholesterol
but clearly they are anti-inflammatory
which
statins can lower cholesterol statins
can lower inflammation but do they
dramatically change outcomes
so if guys like you and i take statin
drugs do they lower our risk of having a
heart attack stroke or dying the answer
is some studies show say yes by a little
bit but we need better than that like
that's not good enough for me right i
don't wanna you know to lower my risk
from seven percent to six percent that's
what the statin data shows
i want zero percent i don't want to die
my father died at 63. i don't want to
die i don't i want to be a you know i
became a father you know the third time
when i was 47 years old i got a
one-year-old i'm 48 years old now and
i'm laying in bed with my you know with
my baby daughter like i want to live um
and we're not going to live with
pharmaceuticals that's very clear so
back to the inflammation we need to find
out why the inflammation is there and
again it comes from nutrition and it
comes from the lifestyle and by
lifestyle i mean all the environmental
things that are going on in the sleep
and the sun
you know and and the stress factor we
want to know where people are at and we
want to address it because we cannot be
successful without helping mental issues
yeah no question um
talk to me about heavy metals really
fast where are people getting those in
their system
uh where do people get heavy metals in
their system heavy metals can be coming
from the air so air pollution if you
live in an air polluted city you can get
it from there uh you can get you know
let's let's just take aluminum for
example aluminum and a lot of these
metals can be in your cookware so your
cookware is a main source and a lot of
these people now for example bone broth
has gotten very popular what do you cook
your bone broth in
you're gonna put your food in some 24
hour 36 hour boil and now you're
drinking this down you better have good
cookware to get it
uh good cookware because my wife eats
the most bone broth uh our cookware is a
salad master so salad master it's been
around for 75 years it's surgical
stainless steel cookware that is
titanium coated so it's the same
utensils it's the same material that
they use on surgical equipment so it
does not
leach any metals into the food
um what else uh you know obviously
vaccines contain aluminum vaccines
contain mercury so you're going to get
heavy metals from that different
pharmaceuticals seafood can have it so i
tell people not to eat big fish
tell people not to eat
tuna
shark swordfish you know things like
that tell people to avoid those uh but
the small fish wild salmon sardines
anchovy shellfish those are all good to
go
um
yeah those are i mean but that's really
the thing is that you can also but you
can get tested for heavy metals very
easily so get tested see where you're
high look up where you may be getting
that exposure and then number one get
rid of the exposure number two now you
start having to come up with the
detoxification pathways to get those
metals and contaminants out of the body
so that comes to things like glutathione
boosters glutathione is the main
antioxidant made in the liver you want a
lot of it you can test it you can test
intracellular levels of glutathione
so once again to
and whether that's sauna or
or
uh
uh you know light therapy different ways
to once again kind of detox the
pollutants out of the body
all right if people were going to make
only one change that would have the
biggest impact on their health
what one change would you want them to
make
it would be to embrace the sun
it would be the embrace in the sunshine
story so for example there are tribes in
africa and the tribes in africa they're
they're
obviously hunter-gatherers
they live outdoors
they live in a somewhat you know
pollution-free environment
and uh yeah they get they go to sleep
with the sun down awake with the sunrise
get tons of sunshine they've done
studies where they've fed those people
fast food junk food and it does nothing
to them
nothing yet if you bring them out of
their
climate
and you put them into our average
lifestyle they get sick
so the food is a factor but it's not the
only thing it really is once again it
really is kind of all those different
things so i hate when people you know
put me on the spot to say one thing
because it really should be that whole
triumvirate but i will say you know like
i said before eating organic i think
takes you to a different level because
that way whatever your vice is
you can do it organically without the
pollutants without the pesticides
without the contaminants and i'm sure
you know drinking organic coffee tastes
just as good as any other coffee that's
out there i have no idea because i don't
drink coffee but all right
all right tell people where they can
find your book where they can learn more
about you uh so our website is
thedoctorswolfson.com and doctors is
abbreviated drs uh you can buy the book
on my website uh i do have a podcast
called the healthy heart show and i
interview some fantastic people and then
we're on you know facebook and social
media some of my opinions are pretty
controversial so i don't know if i'll
always be on uh facebook and uh on
places like that but uh uh we'll see
there it is all right
guys if you haven't already be sure to
subscribe and until next time my friends
be legendary
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential